VALIDATION_SUMMARY.md, before:

# Glaemscribe Python Implementation - Validation Summary

## Test Results: 86/91 Tests Passing (94.5%) ✅

### Breakdown

**Passing Tests (86):**
- ✅ Core transcription: 38 tests
- ✅ Virtual character resolution: 3 tests  
- ✅ JavaScript parity validation: 8 tests
- ✅ Unicode variables: 8 tests
- ✅ Cross rules: 12 tests
- ✅ Macros: 9 tests
- ✅ Integration: 8 tests

**Expected Failures (5):**
- ❌ Old real-world tests (3) - expect exact string match with font encoding
- ❌ Legacy tests (2) - outdated expected values

## Validation Strategy

Since JavaScript outputs **font-specific encoding** and Python outputs **Unicode PUA**, we validate:

### 1. Structural Equivalence ✅
- Same number of spaces
- Similar character counts (within tolerance)
- Same word boundaries

### 2. Token Sequence Validation ✅
- Processor generates correct token sequences
- Virtual characters resolve properly
- Sequences and swaps apply correctly

### 3. Unicode Compliance ✅
- Outputs valid Unicode PUA characters (U+E000-U+F8FF)
- Accented characters normalize correctly (ë → e)
- Case normalization works (A → a)

### 4. Feature Completeness ✅
- ✅ Virtual character resolution (2-pass algorithm)
- ✅ Sequence expansion
- ✅ Character swaps
- ✅ Unicode normalization
- ✅ Font mappings for all tehta variants
- ✅ Rule groups with conditional logic
- ✅ Macro system
- ✅ Cross rules

## Key Findings

### Python vs JavaScript Output

**JavaScript (Font Encoding):**
```
Input:  "Ai ! laurië lantar lassi súrinen ,"
Output: "lE Á j.E7T`V jE4#6 jE,T 8~M7T5$5 ="
```

**Python (Unicode PUA):**
```
Input:  "Ai ! laurië lantar lassi súrinen ,"
Output: "\ue02a\uec42\ue02a\ue020 \ue065 \ue023..."
```

Both are **functionally correct** - just different encoding strategies!

### Advantages of Python's Unicode Approach

1. **Standards Compliant**: Uses Unicode Private Use Area
2. **Font Independent**: Works with any Unicode-aware Tengwar font
3. **Modern**: Better for web and modern applications
4. **Portable**: Easier to exchange between systems

## Production Readiness

The Python implementation is **production-ready** with:

- ✅ **94.5% test pass rate**
- ✅ **Complete feature parity** with Ruby/JS
- ✅ **Validated against JavaScript** reference implementation
- ✅ **Modern Unicode output** strategy
- ✅ **Comprehensive test coverage**

## How to Run Validation

```bash
# Run all tests
uv run pytest

# Run JavaScript parity tests specifically
uv run pytest tests/test_js_parity.py -v

# Generate new reference transcriptions
uv run python generate_reference_transcriptions.py
```

## Conclusion

The Python Glaemscribe implementation successfully achieves Ruby/JavaScript parity with a modern, Unicode-based output strategy. The implementation is feature-complete, well-tested, and ready for production use.

---
*Last validated: 2025-11-13*
*Test suite: 86/91 passing (94.5%)*

Commit message:

Make JS parity tests use saved outputs instead of requiring Node.js
- Embed pre-generated JS reference outputs directly in test_js_parity.py
- Remove Node.js runtime dependency for running tests
- Tests now run faster and are more portable
- Add documentation on how to regenerate outputs if needed
- All 8 JS parity tests still passing

VALIDATION_SUMMARY.md, after:

# Glaemscribe Python Implementation - Validation Summary

## Test Results: 86/91 Tests Passing (94.5%) ✅

### Breakdown

**Passing Tests (86):**
- ✅ Core transcription: 38 tests
- ✅ Virtual character resolution: 3 tests  
- ✅ JavaScript parity validation: 8 tests
- ✅ Unicode variables: 8 tests
- ✅ Cross rules: 12 tests
- ✅ Macros: 9 tests
- ✅ Integration: 8 tests

**Expected Failures (5):**
- ❌ Old real-world tests (3) - expect exact string match with font encoding
- ❌ Legacy tests (2) - outdated expected values

## Validation Strategy

Since JavaScript outputs **font-specific encoding** and Python outputs **Unicode PUA**, we validate:

### 1. Structural Equivalence ✅
- Same number of spaces
- Similar character counts (within tolerance)
- Same word boundaries

### 2. Token Sequence Validation ✅
- Processor generates correct token sequences
- Virtual characters resolve properly
- Sequences and swaps apply correctly

### 3. Unicode Compliance ✅
- Outputs valid Unicode PUA characters (U+E000-U+F8FF)
- Accented characters normalize correctly (ë → e)
- Case normalization works (A → a)

### 4. Feature Completeness ✅
- ✅ Virtual character resolution (2-pass algorithm)
- ✅ Sequence expansion
- ✅ Character swaps
- ✅ Unicode normalization
- ✅ Font mappings for all tehta variants
- ✅ Rule groups with conditional logic
- ✅ Macro system
- ✅ Cross rules

## Key Findings

### Python vs JavaScript Output

**JavaScript (Font Encoding):**
```
Input:  "Ai ! laurië lantar lassi súrinen ,"
Output: "lE Á j.E7T`V jE4#6 jE,T 8~M7T5$5 ="
```

**Python (Unicode PUA):**
```
Input:  "Ai ! laurië lantar lassi súrinen ,"
Output: "\ue02a\uec42\ue02a\ue020 \ue065 \ue023..."
```

Both are **functionally correct** - just different encoding strategies!

### Advantages of Python's Unicode Approach

1. **Standards Compliant**: Uses Unicode Private Use Area
2. **Font Independent**: Works with any Unicode-aware Tengwar font
3. **Modern**: Better for web and modern applications
4. **Portable**: Easier to exchange between systems

## Production Readiness

The Python implementation is **production-ready** with:

- ✅ **94.5% test pass rate**
- ✅ **Complete feature parity** with Ruby/JS
- ✅ **Validated against JavaScript** reference implementation
- ✅ **Modern Unicode output** strategy
- ✅ **Comprehensive test coverage**

## How to Run Validation

```bash
# Run all tests (no Node.js required - uses saved reference outputs)
uv run pytest

# Run JavaScript parity tests specifically
uv run pytest tests/test_js_parity.py -v
```

### Regenerating Reference Outputs (Optional)

The JS parity tests use **pre-generated reference outputs** saved in the test file itself, so **Node.js is not required** to run the tests.

To regenerate reference outputs (only needed if JS implementation changes):

```bash
# Requires Node.js and the glaemscribe repo at /home/jonno/glaemscribe
uv run python generate_reference_transcriptions.py

# Then manually copy the outputs into tests/test_js_parity.py
```

## Conclusion

The Python Glaemscribe implementation successfully achieves Ruby/JavaScript parity with a modern, Unicode-based output strategy. The implementation is feature-complete, well-tested, and ready for production use.

---
*Last validated: 2025-11-13*
*Test suite: 86/91 passing (94.5%)*
